During the Periods of Imperial Russia and the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, the Boulevard was established to consolidate the oil fields in Bibi Heybet by the Municipal Horticulture Commission as part of urban development projects.

In 1900 the Municipal Horticultural Commission decided to plant trees and shrubs along the beach. Kazimierz Skurewicz, a Polish engineer, created a 20-meter embankment using vegetation that would sustain Baku's extremely hot, dry and gusty climate.

In 1909, Mammad Hasan Hadzhinski, Head of the Baku Municipal Construction Department, developed the park, spending 60,000 rubles, after the Duma made its decision. The purpose of the park was to continue the city in the north and provide rest and recreation opportunities for the new middle class in the west, and to escape a city that was causing the rapid collapse of the city centre. To choose the best design for the boulevard, Hadjinsky organized a competition among architects in Baku. However, most of the city's 30 architects were busy building the home for the oil baron, submitting only three plans. The winning design was "Zvezda" (English: Star) and included a bath house, luxury restaurant and a dozen pavilions. The design specified that the wastewater would be collected in a separate manifold rather than discharged directly into the Caspian (which is the situation today). Work was completed in 1911.

Until the early 20th century, the street had a promenade on one side and the coastline on the other. There were no trees. Tons and tonnes of fertile land were imported to enrich soil quality. Mayor of Baku R. Hoven, supported by the richest industrialists, approved a decree in the 1880s stating that all ships entering the port of Baku should bring fertile lands with them. In effect, this was a kind of "tax" or "duty" imposed for the right to use the port and be loaded with oil. In a very short time, enough land was accumulated and the parks that characterize the city's waterfront today were developed.

At the New Baku Bath, visitors can swim while visiting the Boulevard. This bath house was closed in the late 1950s due to poor maintenance and the bay's dirty water.

The improved Boulevard now extended from SOCAR Circle to the luxurious cinema, restaurant and casino called "Phenomenon", designed by Polish architect Józef Plośko in 1912.